docs: Stream Type proposal. (#10)
video-dev/media-ui-extensions: proposals/0010-stream-type.md

- Feature Name: Stream Type
- Start Date: 2023-03-10
- PR: [video-dev/media-ui-extensions#10](https://github.com/video-dev/media-ui-extensions/pull/10)

# Summary

This is a proposal to provide well defined behaviors and an API for distinguishing between "live" content vs. "on demand" (or pre-recorded).

# Motivation

> The idea of different “stream types” has been around for a long time in various HTTP Adaptive Streaming (HAS) standards and its precursors in some manner - minimally distinguishing between “live” content and “video on demand” / "on demand" content. However, these categories aren’t consistently named or distinguished in the same way across the various specifications. Moreover, there is no corresponding API in the browser. Yet these categories directly inform how one expects users to consume and interact with the media, including what sort of UI or “chrome” should be made available for the user. By way of example, the built in controls/UI in Safari that show up for a live src are different than those that show up for a VOD playlist. This proposal aims to normalize the names and definitions of stream types (in a way that is extensible and evolvable over time) by way of how they are expected to be consumed and interacted with by a viewer/user. It also provides a concise and easy to understand differentiator for anyone implementing different UIs/controls/"chromes" for the various stream types.

Reviewer: nit: `live src -> live source`
```suggestion
The idea of different “stream types” has been around for a long time in various HTTP Adaptive Streaming (HAS) standards and its precursors in some manner - minimally distinguishing between “live” content and “video on demand” / "on demand" content. However, these categories aren’t consistently named or distinguished in the same way across the various specifications. Moreover, there is no corresponding API in the browser. Yet these categories directly inform how one expects users to consume and interact with the media, including what sort of UI or “chrome” should be made available for the user. By way of example, the built in controls/UI in Safari that show up for a live source are different than those that show up for a VOD playlist. This proposal aims to normalize the names and definitions of stream types (in a way that is extensible and evolvable over time) by way of how they are expected to be consumed and interacted with by a viewer/user. It also provides a concise and easy to understand differentiator for anyone implementing different UIs/controls/"chromes" for the various stream types.
```

An additional goal of this proposal is to recommend for MSE-based players or “playback engines” to try to normalize their use of existing APIs to be as consistent as possible with the proposed inferred stream type Algorithm.

# Guide-level Explanation

## Definitions

- __Live Media Stream__ - Media content that is being made available in real-time at the time of playback, and the end of the media (if there is an end), will only be available sometime in the future.

>   - __NOTE__ - This definition also applies to "DVR" or "sliding window" content, where the content is being published/provided in real-time but earlier content is still also available.

Reviewer: Should this mention that "DVR" has already finished broadcasting is likely "On Demand"/VOD at that point?

Reviewer: Maybe something like this:
```suggestion
  - __NOTE__ - This definition also applies to "DVR" or "sliding window" content while the content is being published/provided in real-time but earlier content is still also available. Once it has finished broadcasting it is considered On Demand.
```

Reviewer: Also, I guess https://github.com/video-dev/media-ui-extensions/pull/10#discussion_r1137842438 means that this probably shouldn't be changed.

- `"on-demand"` - The current loaded media source is an On Demand Stream.
- `"live"` - The current loaded media source is a Live Stream (including potentially "DVR" or "sliding window" live streams).
- `"unknown"` - No media source is set, the source is not yet loaded (e.g. because `preload="none"`), or the stream type has yet to be determined.

### Recommended computation for RFC8216 (aka HLS)

`streamType = (#EXT-X-PLAYLIST-TYPE === "VOD") ? "on-demand" : "live"`

__Context__:

> A Media Playlist has further constraints on its updates if it contains an EXT-X-PLAYLIST-TYPE tag.  An EXT-X-PLAYLIST-TYPE tag with a value of VOD indicates that the Playlist file MUST NOT change.  An EXT-X-PLAYLIST-TYPE tag with a value of EVENT indicates that the Server MUST NOT change or remove any part of the Playlist file, with the exception of EXT-X-PART tags and Media Metadata tags as described above; the Server MAY append lines to the Playlist.

  \- From: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-pantos-hls-rfc8216bis-12#section-6.2.1

#### NOTE: Why not `#EXT-X-ENDLIST` detection?

> The `#EXT-X-ENDLIST` tag only indicates that a particular playlist will no longer be updated with additional Media Segments or media segment parts (`#EXTINF` / `#EXT-X-PART-INF`). Using this value therefore conflates, e.g., an ended live stream with an on demand stream, and thus should not be relied upon for stream type detection.

Reviewer 2: Based on the definition...

> On-demand: "Media content that is entirely available"
> Live: "and the end of the media...will only be available sometime in the future [i.e. not ended yet]

Should endlist detection trigger a change, at least for an Event/DVR playlist? This was at least the one clear justification I could come up with for having a specific event fire.

Author: > Should endlist detection trigger a change, at least for an Event/DVR playlist?

Hmmm I strongly think no, and if anything should change, it's word-smithing around the definitions.

Reviewer 2: Doesn't the video element get a duration when endlist comes in? What might happen in a live UI that now has a duration? What's the expectation of what should happen in the live UI when a video is no longer live, DVR or otherwise?

>  it's word-smithing around the definitions

Not sure I follow that. Isn't this a decision of if the event should fire when a DVR live stream ends?

Author: Perhaps I am unclear on your proposal. Are you proposing that 

1. `"streamtypechange"` should be dispatched, 
2. the value of `streamType` itself should change (from `"live"` to `"event"`) based on a duration change/`EXT-X-ENDLIST`, or 
3. both?

I'm cool with ensuring that `"streamtypechange"` should fire whenever the stream type in fact has changed (aka (1) and what I've said in the other discussion thread). However, I don't believe the stream type should change as a result of a live stream ending (whether or not it's DVR) (aka (2)), as that conflates two concepts that many UI developers plausibly don't want to conflate ("a live stream that has now ended" vs. "this was a live stream and now it's an on demand stream").

Reviewer: I think that `Why not simply rely on ``duration``?` section answers my concerns for the most part. `duration` could be used to know whether the stream is live *now* and `streamType` could be used to know whether this is a live stream (with the caveat that the PLAYLIST-TYPE/MPD@type doesn't change for this source).

\- From: *§5.3.1.2 Table 3 - Semantics of MPD element*

### Recommended inferred value from native `HTMLMediaElement`

```js
streamType = Number.isFinite(mediaEl.duration)
  ? "on-demand"
  : mediaEl.duration === Number.POSITIVE_INFINITY
  ? "live"
  : "unknown"
```

__Context__:

`media.duration`: 
> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Returns the length of the media resource, in seconds, assuming that the start of the media resource is at time zero. <br/>
> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Returns NaN if the duration isn't available. <br/>
> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Returns Infinity for unbounded streams.

\- From: https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/media.html#dom-media-duration-dev

## Event: `"streamtypechange"`

This event should be dispatched from an extended `HTMLMediaElement` instance whenever the stream type has been determined for a loaded media source.

> __NOTE__: For media unload cases, implementors *__SHOULD__* ensure the `streamType` is (re)set to `"unknown"` after an unload begins but prior to any `"emptied"` external event handlers being invoked. This ensures that consumers of the API may reliably use the `"emptied"` event to monitor potential changes in `"streamType"`.

Reviewer 2: I don't see a problem with this suggestion in general, but does this matter if the `streamtypechange` event exists? Feels like either we have good reasons for this event and we're telling devs they should listen for it when they care about live vs. vod UIs, or you can rely on existing events and we should spell out the events where stream type is likely to change. I'm not sure a mix is helpful?

Author: We can definitely make it a requirement to dispatch a `"streamtypechange"` even on unload. I agree that a mix isn't helpful, but it's the reality of other property state change events in `HTMLMediaElement`. I'd actually prefer always relying on `"streamtypechange"` if that's how you're leaning.

Reviewer 2: > it's the reality of other property state change events in HTMLMediaElement

I don't doubt you're right, but which ones?

> if that's how you're leaning

If the event exists that's how I lean. It's smelly if streamType changes and the event doesn't fire. Unless maybe if I'm hearing you say the entire media element source state workflow already depends on certain _reset_ events like `emptied`.

Author: > I don't doubt you're right, but which ones?

A couple of examples:

1. `paused` state - If the src is already playing and then the src is unloaded (`mediaEl.src = null; mediaEl.load()`), the `paused` value will update from `false` to `true`, but there is not a corresponding event (other than `emptied`) to monitor for the change.
2. `duration` state - If the src is already loaded and then the source is unloaded (`mediaEl.src = null; mediaEl.load()`), the `duration` value will update from e.g. some finite numeric value to `NaN`, but there is not a corresponding event (other than `emptied`) to monitor for the change.

I'm pretty confident that there are more examples, but this provides a couple to indicate that "unload"/"emptied" cases are treated "on a different order", so to speak, with respect to media state events and state updates.

All that said, I'm still 💯 on board with dispatching `"streamtypechange"` for unload cases, since I personally think this is "the right way to do it" (aka if an event purports to model changes for some state, it should be dispatches _**whenever**_ that state changes).

Reviewer: If this was implemented by browser vendors, would this event be necessary? Or would `loadedmetadata` or `durationchange` be sufficient?

Looking at the HTML spec, it specifically calls out that no extra events are dispatched as part of unloading. It'll either be an `emptied` event or an `error` event. You won't get any other events like `removetrack` or `durationchange` or `paused`. (see https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/media.html#loading-the-media-resource:event-media-emptied-3)
There's a discussion on the spec around making a change for this https://github.com/whatwg/html/issues/4874
My first instinct would be to follow what the HTML spec does currently and update it when that issue is resolved.

Author: I was unaware of that discussion, good callout! What you're saying makes sense to me (tl;dr - expect to monitor `emptied` events for changes in the `streamtype` value because that's established in spec right now), in which case we would not change the proposal (unless/until there is an official resolution in the discussion referenced ☝️). @heff thoughts?

Author: > If this was implemented by browser vendors, would this event be necessary? Or would `loadedmetadata` or `durationchange` be sufficient?

@gkatsev If the browser venders supported native playback for the respective HAS specifications, I believe `loadedmetadata` would be both sufficient and appropriate (assuming they load + parse all necessary manifest/playlist files before dispatching, which I suspect they would).

# Rationale and alternatives

This proposed solution provides a simple API with simple values for exposing information that is useful for UI development that distinguishes between live and on demand content, but is only guaranteed to be available by the code/entity responsible for parsing the media data. Based on the scope of currently proposed stream types, an alternative implementation could potentially rely on `duration` values (corresponding to the values used in *§Recommended inferred value from native `HTMLMediaElement`*, above). Below is a discussion on why this is not recommended.

## Why not simply rely on `duration`?

While there are elements of various specifications that suggest live content *should*, under most circumstances, have a `duration=Infinity` (See, e.g. https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/media.html#dom-media-duration-dev, https://www.w3.org/TR/media-source-2/#dom-mediasource-setliveseekablerange, https://www.w3.org/TR/media-source-2/#dfn-duration-change), there are a few reasons to avoid this.

> 1. Although https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/media.html#dom-media-duration-dev strongly suggests that `duration` *__SHOULD__* be `Infinity` for live streams, there is at least some ambiguity between "live" vs. "unbounded" (referencing the language from the specification), so conflating the two may be inappropriate.

Reviewer: I think `unbounded` is the HTML spec language for live.

Author: Yup!

> 2. At least some "playback engines" *__MAY__* set a finite duration for live streams, at least by default. While I do not know of any cases, this may also be true for some native playback environments.

Reviewer: For web based players, I think it mostly happens for MSE playback that don't use the new API for setting seekable in MSE streams.
